exporting_the_notebook.md, before:

---
title: Exporting the Jupyter Notebook
minutes: 30
---

# Introduction

At the end of this lesson, you will be able to

- Describe the advantages of common electronic publication formats
- Convert your existing Jupyter Notebooks into common publication formats

# Learning Objectives

- Recognize and identify the various publishing related data formats.
- Use NBConvert to export their notebooks in a variety of formats including HTML, PDF, markdown, LaTeX and Reveal.js slides.
- Select an appropriate output format for their publication and justify their choice.
- Create a GitHub account and upload a Jupyter notebook to your GitHub repository for public viewing. 

# Output formats

There are several outlets for our research and each of them often have specific requirements for the formats they can use.
Also, traditionally, publications have been distributed in print journals on a letter-size page, as more journals publish online, electronic formats are becoming popular.
How do you determine the best publication formats to output your publications in?
Is it possible to create multiple outputs for your work for multiple publication venues?

Below, we briefly describe a few formats that are widely used for publication.

## PDF

The PDF format is primarily used for paper-based output.  It contains information about the paper size and the margins.  It can be displayed on a webpage but it is somewhat like posting an image.

## HTML

The HTML format is the native format for the internet.  It does not contain information about printing on paper usually.  Exporting to this format is a popular means of posting content to the web.

## Markdown

Markdown is a plain-text format that was designed to be easily exported to HTML.  It has the advantage over HTML as having fewer characters used for markup which makes it more human-readable.

## LaTeX

LaTeX is a plain-text format that is often compiled into a PDF format.  It is also often used as a submission format for journals.

## Reveal.js

# Discussion

Students can discuss the formats of recent publications they have read or created recently.  We could also find examples in the literature of each format.  (PLOS, Nature)

# Conversion of notebooks to other formats

One benefit of using an open format to write your research is that it is often possible to convert from the open format to other formats.
The Jupyter Notebook allows for the conversion of the open notebook format to other formats such as PDF and HTML.

You can produce a converted file from the Jupyter Notebook graphical interface.
In the File/Download As menu, there are options for

## Demonstration

Here we provide a short demo of downloading these formats

- PDF
- HTML
- Markdown

## Callout on PDF Export

We are going to demonstrate the PDF export ability of the notebook.  To do this on your Jupyter installation will require the installation of the Pandoc and LaTeX libraries.

## Callout on command-line NBConvert

Also, you can perform the export functions at the command line if you want to include the conversion step in a reproducible workflow.

```
jupyter nbconvert example_jupyter_notebook.ipynb --to pdf --output output.pdf
jupyter nbconvert example_jupyter_notebook.ipynb --to html --output output.html
jupyter nbconvert example_jupyter_notebook.ipynb --to html --output output
```

If you would like to learn more about the NBConvert tool, you can visit the
[documentation](https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

## Callout on images

If your Jupyter notebook has plot images generated from your code, they will be embedded in your HTML and PDF documents.  If however, you export to the Markdown format, they will be included in a folder in a zipped archive.

Commit message:

adds some brief use cases for output formats

exporting_the_notebook.md, after:

---
title: Exporting the Jupyter Notebook
minutes: 30
---

# Introduction

At the end of this lesson, you will be able to

- Describe the advantages of common electronic publication formats
- Convert your existing Jupyter Notebooks into common publication formats

# Learning Objectives

- Recognize and identify the various publishing related data formats.
- Use NBConvert to export their notebooks in a variety of formats including HTML, PDF, markdown, LaTeX and Reveal.js slides.
- Select an appropriate output format for their publication and justify their choice.
- Create a GitHub account and upload a Jupyter notebook to your GitHub repository for public viewing. 

# Output formats

There are several outlets for our research and each of them often have specific requirements for the formats they can use.
Also, traditionally, publications have been distributed in print journals on a letter-size page, as more journals publish online, electronic formats are becoming popular.
How do you determine the best publication formats to output your publications in?
Is it possible to create multiple outputs for your work for multiple publication venues?

Below, we briefly describe a few formats that are widely used for publication.

## PDF

The PDF format is primarily used for paper-based output.  It contains information about the paper size and the margins.  It can be displayed on a webpage but it is somewhat like posting an image.

You would use the PDF format if you were interested in printing a copy of your notebook for hand-written comments or for sending to co-authors for reading and commenting in tools like Adobe Acrobat.

## HTML

The HTML format is the native format for the internet.  It does not contain information about printing on paper usually.  Exporting to this format is a popular means of posting content to the web.

If you have a website that you manage, publishing to HTML can make it easy to add your notebook as a page to a website.

## Markdown

Markdown is a plain-text format that was designed to be easily exported to HTML.  It has the advantage over HTML as having fewer characters used for markup which makes it more human-readable.

## LaTeX

LaTeX is a plain-text format that is often compiled into a PDF format using the LaTeX software.  It was originally created for mathematical typesetting and is widely used for publication.

Some of your co-authors may be more comfortable editing LaTeX files than notebook files.
It is also often used as a submission format for journals.

## Reveal.js

# Discussion

Students can discuss the formats of recent publications they have read or created recently.  We could also find examples in the literature of each format.  (PLOS, Nature)

# Conversion of notebooks to other formats

One benefit of using an open format to write your research is that it is often possible to convert from the open format to other formats.
The Jupyter Notebook allows for the conversion of the open notebook format to other formats such as PDF and HTML.

You can produce a converted file from the Jupyter Notebook graphical interface.
In the File/Download As menu, there are options for

## Demonstration

Here we provide a short demo of downloading these formats

- PDF
- HTML
- Markdown

## Callout on PDF Export

We are going to demonstrate the PDF export ability of the notebook.  To do this on your Jupyter installation will require the installation of the Pandoc and LaTeX libraries.

## Callout on command-line NBConvert

Also, you can perform the export functions at the command line if you want to include the conversion step in a reproducible workflow.

```
jupyter nbconvert example_jupyter_notebook.ipynb --to pdf --output output.pdf
jupyter nbconvert example_jupyter_notebook.ipynb --to html --output output.html
jupyter nbconvert example_jupyter_notebook.ipynb --to html --output output
```

If you would like to learn more about the NBConvert tool, you can visit the
[documentation](https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

## Callout on images

If your Jupyter notebook has plot images generated from your code, they will be embedded in your HTML and PDF documents.  If however, you export to the Markdown format, they will be included in a folder in a zipped archive.
