instructor_notes.md, before:

# Instructor notes

## Motivation

## Narrative

## Timeline  
Four modules:  
1) Exporting your Notebook (35 minutes)  
2) Documentation (35 minutes)  
3) Record-level Metadata (35 minutes)  
4) Publishing your Work (50 minutes)  
Total: 2 hrs, 35 minutes  

## 1) Exporting your Notebook
### Timeline
### Customization
### Resources

## 2) Documentation  
### Timeline
### Customization
### Resources

## 3) Record-level Metadata  
### Timeline
- Exercise 1: Evaluating quality of metadata records (7 minutes)   
- Whole Group Discussion of Exercise 1 (5 minutes)  
- Instructor Led Discussion about record-level metadata types (7 minutes)  
- Discussion about keywords (4 minutes)  
- Exercise 2: Picking keywords for gapminder dataset.  
   - Individually pick max five keywords for the gapminder dataset. (3 minutes)  
   - Work with partner, pick max five keywords (can come up with new ones or use from union). (3 minutes)  
   - Whole group discussion to pick max five keywords final. (5 minutes)  
### Customization
- You can use other Zenodo entries. Make sure that you choose at least one entry with a non-descriptive title (eg "Dataset5"), one with a 
descriptive title but no keywords, and one with both a descriptive title and good keywords. 
- For the ranking exercise: worst = no keywords + vague title < no keywords + descriptive title < descriptive title + 
vague keywords < descriptive title + descriptive keywords = best.
- When running low on time, prioritize the ranking exercise and the related discussion and skip the keywords exercise.
### Resources

## 4) Publishing your Work  
### Timeline  
### Customization  
### Resources

Commit message:

adds instructor notes for the notebook export lesson

instructor_notes.md, after:

# Instructor notes

## Motivation

## Narrative

## Timeline  
Four modules:  
1) Exporting your Notebook (35 minutes)  
2) Documentation (35 minutes)  
3) Record-level Metadata (35 minutes)  
4) Publishing your Work (50 minutes)  
Total: 2 hrs, 35 minutes  

## 1) Exporting your Notebook

### Timeline
- Presentation of different formats (10 minutes)
- Search for examples of different formats online and discuss (10 minutes)
- Demonstration of Jupyter Notebook export (10 minutes)

### Customization
- If your participants are expecting to be able to create PDF images, you can instruct them to download and install the Pandoc and LaTeX packages in advance of the workshop.  However, these may produce installation troubles.

### Resources
- We have included callouts for some of the more involved aspects of notebook conversion.
- It is worth verifying before the lesson that your installation of the notebook gives the expected behavior with images.  The most portable thing is to embed the images in the document.
- By default, GUI html export embeds as Base64
- By default, GUI markdown export creates a folder and a zip


## 2) Documentation  
### Timeline
### Customization
### Resources

## 3) Record-level Metadata  
### Timeline
- Exercise 1: Evaluating quality of metadata records (7 minutes)   
- Whole Group Discussion of Exercise 1 (5 minutes)  
- Instructor Led Discussion about record-level metadata types (7 minutes)  
- Discussion about keywords (4 minutes)  
- Exercise 2: Picking keywords for gapminder dataset.  
   - Individually pick max five keywords for the gapminder dataset. (3 minutes)  
   - Work with partner, pick max five keywords (can come up with new ones or use from union). (3 minutes)  
   - Whole group discussion to pick max five keywords final. (5 minutes)  
### Customization
- You can use other Zenodo entries. Make sure that you choose at least one entry with a non-descriptive title (eg "Dataset5"), one with a 
descriptive title but no keywords, and one with both a descriptive title and good keywords. 
- For the ranking exercise: worst = no keywords + vague title < no keywords + descriptive title < descriptive title + 
vague keywords < descriptive title + descriptive keywords = best.
- When running low on time, prioritize the ranking exercise and the related discussion and skip the keywords exercise.
### Resources

## 4) Publishing your Work  
### Timeline  
### Customization  
### Resources
